This video is brought to you by mine.
Hey, wisecrack, Helen here. So something weird is happening to us.
Sensibly smart public figures lately, public intellectuals. If you will,
Neil deGrasse,
Tyson who built a massive platform to spread science literacy has transformed
into a weird well actually guy who says very dumb things about philosophy.
My concern there is that the philosopher believes they're actually asking deep
questions about nature and to the scientist. It's what are you doing?
Why are you wasting your time?
Why are you concerning yourself with the meaning of meaning.
Which I am still very mad about Neil,
then there's your Elon Musk type who has leveraged his fortune and fame to
become a self appointed spokesman on a wide variety of issues or routinely
giving out information that is either bunkers or just plain deceptive to the
point that he even I a once self-proclaimed Elon Musk fan girl can no longer
stand behind it.
The institutions that publish public intellectuals aren't doing well either the
New York times can't seem to go one month without putting out a massively
ridiculed op-ed from brainy folks like David Brooks,
and then there's the hundreds or thousands or Jesus.
I can't even count the amount of YouTube talking heads with hyper dedicated
followings, good and bad. They cover current events and popular culture. Well,
it's too diverse a group to describe monolithically and I won't name any names
for fear of provoking their legions,
these YouTube public intellectuals might've come across your feeds for,
for instance, not understanding basic human anatomy.
It'd be easy to think that our society is getting dumber or are great thinkers,
less rigorous, but that doesn't seem like a fair assessment.
There are some truly great intellectuals out there doing great work still as
chronically online people who like to learn.
We're convinced that there's something severely messed up about how knowledge is
created and shared in the 21st century. So what if the grass Tyson's weird,
Twitter threads are a symptom of a much larger problem.
And what is the biggest threat to good ideas is not at all what you thought
let's find out in this wisecrack edition on public intellectuals,
what happened. But first here's a bad idea,
letting your personal data float around the internet forever.
This week sponsor is mine.
Mine is a really helpful and free to use smart data assistant these days.
It's easy to feel like your data is out of your hands,
but mine helps you discover where it is and what kind of data is out there.
The process is really simple and quick.
All you have to do is go to same mind.com using the link in the description and
sign in using Google, Microsoft, or Yahoo.
It'll give you a summary of everything that your email is attached to.
You can see how many companies hold your data and see if they're storing
sensitive stuff like identity or financial information.
When you move over to your footprint,
you can see every company that holds your data and the risk of data breach.
There are so many sites I haven't used for years that are still collecting my
data, which sucks. So it's great. I can just send a request to have it removed.
Take control of who has your information by looking into mine today,
click the link in the, to check it out for free.
It is a strange time for our society. Intellectually speaking,
the amount of money flowing into foundations,
both liberal and conservative to produce new and original research is
unprecedented.
Authors are paid tens of thousands of dollars to speak to private and public
groups of curious minds.
There are whole conferences dedicated to exploring new and disruptive ideas and
places like YouTube have reduced the traditional media stranglehold on the
dissemination of ideas.
If there's a marketplace of ideas where information good and bad gets to Duke it
out for supremacy, one might think this is a kind of golden age,
but not many do so. What's going on to figure that out.
Let's talk about what scholar Daniel Dresner calls the ideas industry,
a vast ecosystem of thought production that stands in contrast to the
intellectual landscape of decades. Past for Dresner.
A public intellectual is a person who comments on a variety of ideas.
They know enough about many things to be able to point out intellectual
charlatans. They expose accepted wisdom when it doesn't stand up to scrutiny.
And for this, a public intellectual is crucial to democratic discourse.
They span the ideological spectrum. People like William F.
Buckley or trend Russell or James Baldwin. The French love them.
And people like John Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir,
and Michelle Fuko were superstars in the bistro line streets of their native
country.
They went on TV and radio and criticized their government's foreign policy.
They would debate about race and racism and so on public intellectual still
exist. But for everyone you can name,
there's probably a dozen pseudo intellectuals who come to mind to much more
easily. What Dresner calls, thought leaders,
a horrific invention of the ideas industry. You probably know the type,
someone with a big idea, an idea that will revolutionize everything.
If a public intellectual curmudgeonly points out what's wrong with everyone,
else's worldview.
A thought leader is an evangelist for their own public intellectuals,
tread carefully and weigh evidence.
Thought leaders have a product to sell and sometimes public intellectuals,
our solution to becoming thought leaders themselves enter Amy Cuddy.
Connie is a social psychologist who spent the first few years of her career
doing the normal academic thing, researching publishing thinking.
Then in 2010,
she published a paper suggesting that one's posture could have effects not only
on their psyche, but their biochemistry by doing a power pose.
Say a person could not only experience feelings of power,
but raise their testosterone and reduce the levels of cortisol,
the stress chemical in their blood intimidated. Before your big sales meeting,
do a power pose, got an ACE, an exam power pose stuck on dark souls.
Stand up, put your legs in a wide stance and pick that controller back up.
My guy, it's not just a feeding demons though.
Connie and her fellow researchers suggested this simple hack might be of
particular use to those who feel chronically powerless,
whether it's because you're the grunt in an organization or because you belong
to a social group that has been in scientific terms, screw by society.
Two years later,
he would go on to give a Ted talk about the topic that will become the platforms
second, most popular with over 40 million views.
The implication of course is that if you're a powerless in society,
the power pose can help you climb to the top of the social hierarchy,
thus combating inequality.
And I realized that she had not just faked it till she made it.
She had actually faked it till she became it.
Also, Ted talk tickets are between five and $10,000. I don't make the rules,
but Connie is no doubt. An academic.
Her Ted success had launched her into the role of a thought leader. As author,
a non geared artist writes in his book,
winners take all her academic work now was competing with a budding speaking
career and a self-help book.
She was named a game-changer by time magazine in 2012,
she had a product and that product was the power pose. Of course,
as an academic, she was interested in other kinds of research that in theory,
she would also like to expose to a wide audience,
but instead of boosting her other work,
her Ted fame did the opposite as Garrett artists' notes,
despite Cadiz rising fame, she found herself in a dilemma.
She was an academic interested in studying the complexities of prejudice and
sexism. And yet her Ted talk had drowned out.
Every other thing she had ever said,
and now she was fielding lucrative invitation after invitation to offer her
ideas. The lack of interest in her other work was not exactly a coincidence.
Either Catie had made a splash at the idea circuit defined by events like
Ted South by Southwest or the Aspen ideas festivals and made it to
the big leagues of the ideas industry at this point,
authors like Dresner and Garrett artists note people like Cutty basically become
paid intellectuals for the kinds of people who can dish out 10 grand to attend a
Ted talk in the first place. Once you've been pressed your affluent audience,
you get to give more talks to the executives or staff at Goldman Sachs,
Facebook or Google.
And there was a reason these organizations were interested in Cadiz,
other research, their bottom line,
the audiences Catie was speaking to and being paid lucratively by wanting to
hear only certain kinds of messages, ones that were disruptive,
just not disruptive to their own place in the world.
The Googles Facebooks and Goldman Sachs of the world are interested in hiring
someone like Cuddy so long as her message is a win-win.
The power pose is a safe solution to say, workplace sexism,
no complex changes to company culture have to occur. And most importantly,
nobody has to lose any money. What is specially moved such audiences?
Your artist's rights was the rendering of social problems as unintimidating.
Bite-sized digestible now Catie isn't some lone Wolf.
She existed missed a ton of names.
You probably recognize who write books that end up in airports,
give talks at the conferences and get referenced by important people doing
important things.
And their lifeblood comes from the corporate benefactors that like their win-win
mentality and this isn't without consequence,
wherever business school professor,
the Macondo argues that wall street clings to power,
but promoting ideas that promote the rightness of that power.
They reward those that agree with them and punish those who don't.
As Upton Sinclair said,
it is difficult to get a man to understand something when his salary depends on
not understanding it,
the result can be an entire society twisted to serve the interests of its most
powerful group.
We can also compare it to someone like Sheryl Sandberg who wanted to offer a
win-win solution to sexism by encouraging women to lean in of course,
serious scholars,
Catie included understand that these problems are far too complicated to have
any quick fixes,
but complexity is not what the ideas industry is interested in. Honey,
isn't getting into the door at the Coca Cola center for civil and human rights,
which is a real thing by asking hard questions about why union leaders in their
South American bottling plants have repeatedly disappeared,
but she might get a fat check for explaining to their head of progress.
How workers can personally grow by feeling more competent.
Cutting is an interesting example,
precisely because she seems acutely aware of these problems becoming a
fascinating subject for Giridharadas.
His book to document bud Cutty's introspection is not universally present in the
many thought leaders speaking to anyone who can cut a 50 grand check and make no
mistake. That's really how much some of them get paid historian.
Niall Ferguson reportedly received 50 to $75,000 per speech.
Malcolm Gladwell.
Also reportedly receives over $50,000 per speech.
And if you were mad that Hillary Clinton was getting 200 grand to speak to a
bunch of wall street execs, it's common practice for tons of politicians,
including every ex president like George W.
Bush and bill Clinton with the rare exception of Jimmy Carter.
It's not that every idea any of these people ever had is bad.
While we might say, Hey, get paid, who cares?
It creates a perverse incentive for intellectuals and ex politicians to not rock
the boat too hard unless they want to miss out on hundreds of thousands of
dollars.
This incentive also creates an echo chamber of ideas paid for and consumed by
the people running the world. As Gira Darvis writes,
the money can liberate the top thought leaders from the institutions and
colleagues that might otherwise provide some kind of intellectual check on them
while sometimes turning their ideas into advertisements rather than
self-contained work a consequence of an academic receiving these massive payouts
like Ferguson, is that he doesn't have to please his editors.
He sure as hell doesn't have to please scholars.
He has to please corporations and high net worth individuals.
What's more Connie's power pose research. Wasn't very good as good science.
Someone tried to replicate her findings.
They failed for co-author even disowned the study.
The point is this is not the kind of thing the ideas industry cares about.
They want sound bites that make executives feel good, not objective science.
What we're left with is a whole universe of incredibly intelligent people who
have no to criticize the status quo.
They're turned from critics of everything like a public intellectual to thought
leaders who are evangelists of not too disruptive ideas for Silicon Valley.
As Dresner writes,
Ted talks are designed for thought leaders to appeal to plutocrats at less than
20 minutes, they are mercifully short, a perfect format for potential patrons.
The working rich are busy people operating on a compressed schedule.
You have certainly encountered many trendy ideas secreted by the ideas industry
and its corporate benefactors.
The very real and cool practice of mindfulness meditation has been stripped of
anything that might matter with worker productivity.
As we discussed in our episode on the topic,
Malcolm Gladwell's idea of 10,000 and ours has come under scrutiny for just
being outright wrong. Then there's something like the four-hour workweek,
which promises your regular economic output.
If you only work four hours by underpaying overseas, personal assistance,
of course, Ted talks and speaking gigs, aren't writing Neil deGrasse.
Tyson's bad takes on philosophy or Allegion of rage filled YouTube screens.
But the public sphere of ideas is being injected by a steady stream of Ted
heads. Leading to shallow takes that make easy targets for long invectives.
We're left debating with a torrent of trash instead of quality ideas.
And the pressures filled by Catie is the same pressure being exerted on smart
people looking to be heard, but we'll get there. It also gives people incentive.
Once they've ascended to prominence, to close themselves off from criticism,
Thomas Friedman has stated he can basically write whatever he wants.
I'm in this scary and enviable position. He said,
I can go to my publisher and say, Oh, I want to write a book.
Here's the check don't. You want to know what it's about?
But the public speaking circuit isn't even the scariest source of our pipeline
of garbage ideas for that we have to turn to the think tank American
think tanks started sprouting up in the early 19 hundreds.
As people started wondering if the governor's drinking buddy was maybe less
equipped to deal with trade policy than some kind of expert.
These think tanks claim to be nonpartisan,
although they certainly had their own ideologies.
Some of them are still around today, like the council on foreign relations,
which publishes foreign affairs and the Brookings Institute,
whose goal is to analyze public policy issues at the national level as Dressner
rights,
they were there to assist government bureaucrats to work in conjunction with
them. At the same time, they were bankrolled by the very wealthy,
the Carnegies and the Rockefellers of the world.
Well think tanks were never some kind of perfect organization.
Well events in the last few decades have submitted their position as a way for
people with a lot of money to launder ideas,
to politicians and the public at large,
while the new model might be exemplified by the conservative heritage foundation
under former Senator mint,
it has since gained popularity for liberal and progressive think tanks as well.
Dementia was very good at fundraising,
but most notably he had his staff review all heritage papers and to ensure that
they conform to the official policy of the think tank.
It was the success of heritage that would convince people like the billionaires,
Herbert and Marian Sandler to cut a $20 million check to John Podesta to
create the liberal center for American progress.
Like their conservative counterparts.
The center for American progress is about promoting a certain worldview,
not creating rigorous scholarship or thought as the head of the competitive
enterprise Institute told an interviewer groups like ours,
how do we earn credibility?
We have a very strong point of view and we've never deviated from that point of
view.
As they grappled with incredibly complex issues like poverty alleviation and
fiscal policy, it wasn't the facts driving their conclusion.
It was their preexisting beliefs as author David Callahan summarizes the
think tank was invented in the 20th century to offer objective analysis of
complex issues. Now though,
think tanks often operate as the motherships of ideological movements on both
the left and the right, these think tanks.
Aren't just thinking in a bubble they're a hugely influential part of American
politics. For instance, changes to federal welfare were made in 1996,
after millions of dollars report into research,
arguing that much social spending just made poverty worse.
And as Callaghan notes,
the foreign policy vision behind the Iraq war was partly made by a think tank.
The project for the new American century. In another example,
large sums of money were given by the United Arab Emirates to centers.
Think tanks like the middle East Institute.
If think tanks for once a way to provide independent expertise to governments,
they have become a way for a donor,
even a foreign government to influence policymakers.
You've probably even been exposed to paid for ideas as you watch TV, YouTube,
or scroll through Facebook, for instance,
public opposition to an Iran nuclear deal in 2015 stored after a huge
influx of advertising dollars by interest groups and think tanks if disruptors
and thought leaders seemed so appealing, it might be because many have intuited,
a kind of intellectual bankruptcy everywhere in the world lately.
It seems like everyone is quick to throw their own facts and figures that tell
exactly their side of the story. It can lead to a kind of factual nihilism.
My facts are objective and yours are created by some shill funded by George
Soros.
And it's entirely likely that the existence of think tanks fuels this problem.
Not that we'd all be able to get on the same page otherwise,
but think tanks have dressed up ideological propaganda as objective studies to
return to our Upton Sinclair quote.
It is difficult to get a man to understand something when his salary depends on
not understanding it. This is the marketplace of ideas.
That one looking to become a public intellectual must grapple with,
unless they're willing to bend their views.
They're unlikely to survive at a think tank.
They might get a job at a university. However,
the publisher parish model encourages them to not engage with the public.
And instead double down on writing to an audience of a few dozen specialists.
And then there's the internet amidst think tanks,
Ted heads and countless paid for media. There exists podcast hosts,
political commentators, Twitch, streamers,
and bloggers eager to dispense wisdom.
But these things aren't just thinking into a vacuum.
They're developing intellectual brands.
It's the brands of people like Amy Cuddy that allow them to keep raking in
speaking deals or the brands of columnists like Paul Krugman or Bari Weiss,
which rack up book deals. Well, in a sense, this is nothing new.
There are some unique challenges faced by today's would be intellectuals.
There's a growing sense that intellectuals of all stripes are producing
knowledge cynically with a certain agenda in mind.
And if you're looking for the stuff that comes out of policy, institutes,
think tanks and the speaking circuit, you're not wrong.
General distrust toward mainstream ideas,
along with a declining faith in government institutes,
[inaudible] seems to have drawn many of us to outside commentators,
to rogue public intellectuals when everything is broken,
it makes perfect sense to look for an outside perspective.
Elon Musk as a thinker is appealing precisely because America's infrastructure
is crumbling. Maybe you love how he's trying to revolutionize transportation,
or maybe you think he's deeply missed guided,
but most can probably agree that the problems he's addressing our problems to
begin with bill Gates,
both the public intellectual and the person funneling money into intellectual
endeavors that fit his worldview.
You can step up to much praise and many accolades precisely because of our
waning public health infrastructure. But what's going on with Neil.
If the marketplace of ideas loves one thing it's competition.
And if you're looking to craft an intellectual brand,
you've got to we'll compete. The rest as David Carr wrote in 2012,
the now ancient routes to credibility at small magazines and newspapers,
toiling and menial jobs while learning the business have been wiped out,
replaced by an algorithm of social media, heat and blog, traction,
social media,
especially Twitter and Facebook have made it possible to very easily quantify
the currency and idea has via engagement in shares.
If I'm getting retweeted more,
I'm being heard more and I'm winning in the ideas industry on my way to book
deals, New York times columns and lucrative speaking gigs.
And while this might be the pinnacle of the marketplace of ideas,
it's also exposed a problem with that market markets are great at finding the
equilibrium of supply and demand.
It can really help me decide how to price my 80 potatoes so I can sell them all.
But this mathematical equation doesn't solve for truth. It does. However,
find out exactly how many people want to retweet Neil deGrasse,
Tyson complaining that a marriage story should be called a divorce story.
The free market of ideas,
often overvalue name brand intellectuals who have long given up on being
insightful dresser explores.
How many intellectuals have taken to hiring a staff who go as far as to
outsource the writing or research of their work for reads a car. Yet,
for instance, has a staff of eight people to run his show and write his columns.
Neil Ferguson has a full-time researcher and undergraduates assisting him.
And in the end it can lead to a serious declining quality.
Most people who are good at being intellectuals are lousy at managing
subordinates.
Dresner argues fittingly in 2012 Zacharia was accused of plagiarism after
cutting and pasting from a new Yorker essay. In 2015,
there were dozens of such accusations against him that had piled up.
It shouldn't be surprising that the majority of dialogue happening on YouTube or
Twitter is the slam dunk.
Nobody is going around looking for robust ideologies to critique.
They're looking for rubes who make seemingly bizarre claims about feral hogs or
Elon Musk, making bad predictions about COVID deaths.
YouTube commentators are looking for the dumbest most outrageous thing to make a
video about to soak up easy views. We demand it and they supply it.
It also drives a market of well actually material,
but people like Neil deGrasse,
Tyson who can incessantly complain that we're all using the word awesome, wrong.
And on the other hand, there's people like Michael, who can't wait to pithily,
leave a response about how dumb his Twitter takes are at the same time as
sociologists will Davies writes,
truth has become a kind of war zone that is not very good at finding the truth
truth. He argues comes from dialogue and consensus,
not from a weird fetishization of conflict and debate. When scientists,
for instance are trying to create a COVID vaccine.
The guy shouting debate me about his theory of microscopic minions is not the
missing piece of the scientific puzzle.
There are certainly public intellectual still out there and like all things,
there are good ones and bad ones,
but the actually terrifying thing is how hard it is to navigate where good
information is. Even as a chronically online millennial,
I can't help a question. Every single item that comes across my newsfeed.
Is it some thought leader shrieking into the void?
Is it some paid for think tank study,
but what do you think has the rise of the thought leader ruined intellectual
discourse? Is Twitter making any search for objective truth? Impossible.
Let us know in the comments big,
thanks to our patrons for all your support hit that subscribe button like you're
re-tweeting to grass Tyson's bad, hot take, and as always peace.
[Inaudible].